

1. The purposes and relation
    1. The purpose of each section
        1. The purpose of homage and praise
        2. The purpose of commitment to compose
        3. The purpose of discarding pride
    2. The condensed meaning of each section
        1. The condensed meaning of homage and praise
        2. The condensed meaning of the commitment to compose
        3. The condensed meaning of discarding pride
    3. The literal meaning of each section
        1. The literal meaning of homage and praise
        2. The literal meaning of the commitment to compose
            1. Setting out the subject matter to be elaborated
            2. Abandoning personal invention
            3. Abandoning the fault of repetition
        3. The literal meaning of discarding pride
            1. The understanding of others is not the primary goal
            2. The author’s own understanding is the primary goal
            3. Yet, in dependence upon that, there is benefit for others
    4. The implicit section: the four branches of purpose and relation
        1. The purpose of presenting the four branches
            2. The condensed meaning
            3. The literal meaning
    
2. The primary basis: the individual person
    1. The bodily basis: the difficulty of acquiring the freedoms and endowments
        1. Their nature
        2. Difficult to acquire
        3. The extent of the benefits it brings
    2. The mental basis: meritorious intelligence
       
3. The productive cause: the generation of bodhicitta
    1. Praising the benefits of bodhicitta
        1. Ordinary benefits
            1. Invisible benefits
                1. It overcomes all nonvirtue
                    1. The nature of nonvirtue
                    2. How bodhicitta overcomes nonvirtue
                2. It benefits oneself
                3. It has the power to benefit others
                4. It fulfils individual worldly wishes
            2. Visible benefits
            3. Praising the benefits by analogy
                1. It transforms the inferior into the supreme, like the elixir of an alchemist
                2. It is difficult to find but extremely powerful, like a wish fulfilling jewel
                3. Its fruits know no exhaustion, like the inconceivable tree
                4. It overcomes the inexpiable evil deeds, like a warrior
                5. It consumes the inevitable results of nonvirtuous actions, like the fire at the end of time
                6. Other specific examples
        2. The extraordinary benefits of bodhicitta
            1. Divisions
            2. Characteristics
            3. Benefits of aspiration
            4. Benefits of application
        3. The reasons for the benefits
            1. Scripture
            2. Reasoning
                1. Aspiration bodhicitta
                    1. The vastness of its intent
                    2. Its rarity
                        1. There is nobody else who has such a benevolent intent
                        2. Not even for themselves
                        3. Establishing the greatness of the benefit of generating this mind
                    3. The greatness of its goodness
                2. Application bodhicitta
                    1. The actual practice is undertaken
                    2. The many individuals affected
                        1. Those possessing the cause—ignorance
                        2. Those experiencing result—destitution of happiness
                        3. Those tormented by suffering
                    3. It does not depend on getting anything back
                    4. Establishing vastness
                    5. Explaining how it is particularly powerful
        4. Summarizing the benefits of self
        5. Summarizing the benefits of others

    2. Generating bodhicitta in one's stream of being
        1. Preliminaries
            1. Offerings
                1. Offering worldly substances owned by oneself
                2. Offering unowned worldly substances
                3. Offering the physical body
                4. Offerings emanated by the mind
                    1. Bathing
                    2. Robes and ornaments
                    3. Scented oils
                    4. Flowers
                    5. Incense
                    6. Food
                    7. Lamps
                    8. Palaces
                    9. Articles worthy of great beings
                    10. Offerings not for the purposes of enjoyment—the uninterrupted stream of veneration
                5. Unsurpassable offerings
                6. Offering homage
                    1. Praise
                    2. Prostration to the sources of refuge
            2. Taking refuge
                1. Classifications
                2. Explaining their distinguishing characteristics
                3. Nature
                4. Distinction of resultant refuge and generation of aspiration bodhicitta
                5. Purpose
                6. The meaning of the term ‘refuge’
                7. The distinct trainings
            3. Confession
                1. The power of regret
                    1. Consideration of each type of act individually
                        1. Supplication to the objects of reliance
                        2. Consideration of the natures individually
                        3. Consideration of the objects individually
                    2. Longing to be freed swiftly
                        1. The aspects of longing
                        2. Ceasing to rely on the unreliable
                    3. Consideration of individual meaningless acts
                        1. Various kinds of nonvirtuous actions have been committed
                        2. Consideration of their meaninglessness
                        3. Logically establishing that point
                        4. Empirically establishing that point
                        5. Summary
                    4. Fear of the results
                        1. The inevitable result: the transmigration to another rebirth
                        2. Fear of experiencing this
                        3. The reason why the fear will not abate
                        4. The aspects of suffering
                2. The power of reliance
                    1. Taking hold of the general supports
                    2. Taking hold of the particular supports of specific bodhisattvas
                    3. Having taken hold of the supports, the subsequent practice—to follow their instructions
                3. The power of antidote
                    1. The reasons to persevere in the antidote
                    2. Advice to engage in it quickly
                        1. The example of an illness
                        2. The example of a precipice
                4. The power of desisting
                    1. Restraint for the next life
                        1. Fearing the consequences
                        2. Speciality of the intention to abandon
                    2. Purifying former lives
                    3. Conclusion of the chapter
            4. Rejoicing
                1. Rejoicing in worldly virtue
                    1. Rejoicing in the outcome of merit, which leads to the higher realms
                    2. Rejoicing in the outcome of liberation, which leads to enlightenment
                2. Rejoicing in the virtue of śrāvakas
                3. Rejoicing in the virtue of Buddhas
                    1. Rejoicing in the result
                    2. Rejoicing in the cause
            5. Requesting the wheel of dharma be turned
            6. Supplication
            7. Dedication of the roots of merit
                1. General aspiration for freedom from suffering
                2. Aspiration to eliminate the suffering of sickness
                3. Aspiration to eliminate the suffering of hunger
                4. Aspiration to eliminate the suffering of poverty

        2. Main part
            1. The main part: the actual practice of generating bodhicitta
                1. Aspiration to give up everything
                    1. How to give up everything
                    2. The reason for doing so
                    3. The subsequent practice
                2. Aspiration for inexhaustible causes
                    1. General explanation
                    2. Aspiration for their attitudes to become inexhaustible causes
                    3. Aspiration for their actions to become inexhaustible causes
                3. Aspiration to be a cause of sustenance
                    1. Necessities
                    2. Vast worlds
                    3. Unconstrained location and duration
                4. Reciting the words of the vow
            2. The ritual
                1. The cause of generating bodhicitta with nothing lacking 
                    1. The cause—meditation on compassion
                    2. The root—stabilizing faith
                    3. Other supports of bodhicitta
                2. The purpose of a proper ritual
                    1. That there is a purpose to properly receiving it
                    2. The method of taking it
                        1. From whom it is received
                        2. Basis of receiving
                        3. Time
                        4. Ritual
                        5. Overcoming the objection that it is not possible always to maintain it

        3. The conclusion
            1. Generating joy in the attainment of the benefit of self
                1. Identifying the benefit established
                2. To have concern not to corrupt it with faults
                3. Identifying the difficulty of acquiring it
            2. Generating joy in the attainment of the benefit of others
                1. The power to dispel suffering
                2. The power to dispel obscurations
                3. The power to establish benefit and happiness

4. The cooperating condition: subsequently accomplishing the training
    1. Concern
        1. Concern for bodhicitta
            1. Briefly
            2. Extensively
                1. Reasons for not abandoning bodhicitta
                2. The faults of abandoning it
                    1. One goes to the lower realms
                        1. Deceiving all beings
                        2. Scriptural establishment
                        3. Abandoning contradiction with other scriptures
                    2. The benefit of others is damaged
                        1. It is a heavy downfall for oneself
                        2. Interrupting the virtue of others is just as bad
                        3. The reason for these
                    3. The attainment of the bhūmis is obstructed
        2. Concern for training
            1. Concern to abandon nonvirtue
                1. Faults causing rebirth in the lower realms
                    1. Again and again taking lower rebirths
                    2. Not having had the circumstances of their final exhaustion
                    3. The same again in the future
                2. Not attaining freedom
                3. The instability of freedom when it is attained
                4. No virtuous deeds in the lower realms
                    1. No opportunity for virtue
                    2. The reason for this
                    3. The inability to return from the lower realms
                    4. A scriptural reference for that
            2. Concern to cultivate virtue
                1. Many nonvirtues were previously gathered
                2. They are not exhausted by themselves
                3. Therefore, one should strive in virtue, the antidote
                    1. General explanation of the fault of not striving
                    2. The fault in this life
                    3. The fault in future lives
                    4. Advice in overcoming that with an admonition
                        1. One has attained freedom, the basis
                        2. One has clearly distinguished good from bad
                        3. It is only logical, therefore, to persevere
            3. Concern to abandon the defilements
                1. Examining the contrasting attitude
                    1. Examination of the harms
                        1. Loss of autonomy
                        2. Application to suffering
                        3. Their perpetual presence
                        4. They achieve nothing
                    2. Examining impatience
                        1. Harmful to the mind
                        2. Harmful to the body
                        3. Developing pride
                2. Rejecting the idea that application will create suffering
                    1. The faults of non-application
                        1. An example of the faults of non-application
                        2. The point of the example
                    2. The qualities of application
                        1. Benefit of self
                        2. Benefit of other
                        3. Fulfilment of vows
                    3. The means of devoting oneself to that application
                        1. Not stopping until the defilements have been abandoned
                        2. Dedication in this
                        3. Relying on antidotes for one’s own impatience
                        4. Abandoning objections to that
                        5. No obedience to the defilements
                3. Developing enthusiasm in one’s ability to abandon the defilements
                    1. They have no other basis
                        1. Presenting an example of expulsion
                        2. The related meaning
                        3. The nature of the antidotes which bring about abandonment
                        4. The essential characteristic of their not returning
                    2. They are erroneous perceptions
            4. Concluding summary of concern for training


    2. Mindfulness and clear comprehension
        1. Guarding the mind as the means of guarding training
            1. By guarding the mind, one guards all
                1. Showing this with a forward pervasion
                2. Showing the reverse pervasion
                3. Establishing the reverse pervasion
                4. When one guards the mind, dangers subside
                5. Condensed meaning
            2. The reason everything depends upon mind
                1. All faults depend upon mind
                    1. Presenting a scriptural gloss
                    2. Establishing that
                    3. Conclusion
                2. All virtues depend upon mind
                    1. Giving
                    2. Moral conduct
                    3. Patience
                        1. The actual meaning
                        2. A related example
                        3. The related point
                    4. Energy
                    5. Meditation
                    6. Wisdom
            3. One should make effort to guard the mind
                1. General explanation
                2. Everything is accomplished by it
                3. A perspective for guarding the mind in this way
                4. The reason it makes sense to guard it
                5. Properly guarding it
                6. Conclusion to take great care in mindfulness

        2. Guarding mindfulness and clear comprehension as the means of guarding the mind
            1. Brief description
            2. The faults of lacking mindfulness and clear comprehension
                1. Little power to act
                2. Wisdom will not flourish
                3. Moral conduct will not flourish
                4. Accumulated virtues are destroyed
                5. Accumulated virtues are not produced
            3. Guarding mindfulness as the means of guarding clear comprehension
                1. Expressing the main point
                2. Showing its cause
                    1. Keeping in mind the faults of its loss
                    2. Relying on the conditions which prevent its loss
                        1. The outer condition: reliance on the spiritual friend
                        2. The inner condition: a proper mental attitude
                    3. An additional benefit
                3. How to definitively generate clear comprehension through mindfulness

        3. How to train in the conduct of guarding the mind with mindfulness and clear comprehension
            1. Training in the conduct of vows
                1. In relation to type
                    1. In relation to the body
                        1. Temporarily remaining at ease
                        2. In relation to sight
                        3. In relation to other situations
                        4. Preparing and checking oneself
                    2. In relation to mind
                    3. Times when there is a dispensation regardless of type
                        1. Times when there is a dispensation on bodily conduct
                        2. Referencing a scriptural source for that
                        3. Abandoning an objection
                        4. The qualities of behaving in this way
                        5. The faults of not doing do
                        6. Concluding summary
                2. Guarding against damage
                    1. Guarding against damage to vows of body
                        1. Not letting the vows be stolen by distracting conditions
                        2. Abandoning meaningless behaviour
                        3. Examining the motivation
                    2. Guarding against damage to vows of mind
                        1. Types of antidote
                        2. Briefly explaining how to apply them

            2. Training in the conduct of accumulating virtue
                1. Accomplishing non-attachment to the body
                    1. Inanimate
                    2. Impure
                    3. Essenceless
                    4. Useless
                    5. Applying it to use
                2. Training in the means of accomplishing virtue
                    1. Skilful means for ordinary conduct
                    2. Skilful means for conduct towards agents
                        1. How to respond to those who are giving advice
                        2. How to respond to those who expressing the truth
                        3. How to respond to those who are creating merit
                        4. How to respond to descriptions
                        5. The greatness of the mind that is respectful to others
                    3. Skilful means for conduct of action
                        1. Connected with speaking
                        2. Connected with looking
                        3. Connected with virtuous action
                            1. Intention
                            2. Fields
                            3. Application
                            4. Specific types

            3. Training in the conduct of benefitting sentient beings
                1. Increasing activities for the benefit of others
                2. The conduct of gathering sentient beings
                    1. Gathering with wealth and possessions
                        1. External gathering
                        2. Internal gathering
                    2. Gathering with dharma
                        1. Vessels of its explanation
                        2. Methods of its explanation
                    3. The subsequent conduct of protecting the minds of sentient beings

            4. Factors which enhance the training
                1. The cause of purifying faults
                2. The basis of training
                3. The aim
                4. The teacher of the training
                    1. The spiritual friend
                    2. One should rely upon him
                    3. Consideration of reliance upon application
                5. Becoming knowledgeable
                6. Summary of the training
            5. Applying the key point

    3. Patience
        1. Developing motivation for patience
            1. Invisible results
            2. Visible results
                1. Harm to the mind
                2. Harm to the body
                3. Summarizing the invisible and visible results
        2. Keeping in mind the skilful means for accomplishing patience
            1. Preventing the characteristics of anger
                1. The nature of its cause
                2. Striving in the means of averting that cause
                3. The means of averting that cause
                4. Keeping in mind the means of averting the cause of the cause
                    1. General explanation distinguishing desirable and undesirable dharmas
                    2. Ceasing anger toward the production of undesirables
                        1. Stopping impatience with the production of negative actions towards oneself
                            1. Stopping impatience with the establishment of suffering for oneself
                                1. Tolerating suffering by examining the suffering itself
                                    1. Examining the nature of suffering
                                    2. Examining the great benefits of suffering which is undergone for happiness
                                    3. Examining that the reliance on suffering is not difficult
                                    4. Examining the qualities of the practice
                                    5. Examining the inherent qualities
                                2. Definitive consideration of the qualities in the discrimination
                                    1. Since it depends on a cause, it does not have autonomy
                                        1. Anger and the angry person do not have autonomy
                                        2. Their conditions do not have autonomy
                                    2. Refuting the essential characteristics of autonomy
                                        1. Refuting the position of the Sāṃkhyas
                                        2. Refuting the position of the Naiyāyikas
                                        3. Summary
                                    3. The necessity of overcoming anger
                                    4. Summary
                                3. In discriminating harmful sentient beings, how to think of them as not causing the harm
                                    1. One should have the characteristics of affection in one’s mind
                                    2. Not dwelling on the characteristics of anger
                                    3. Examination of one’s own faults
                                        1. The faults are one’s own
                                        2. The fault of grasping the body, which causes suffering
                                        3. The fault of attachment, which causes suffering
                                        4. The fault of activities which are of no benefit to others
                                        5. The angry mind has it the wrong way round
                                        6. Abandoning objections
                                            1. Abandoning the objection that it is illogical to say others benefit oneself
                                            2. Abandoning the objection that it is illogical to say one harms others
                                            3. Refuting instigating harm
                            2. Stopping impatience with the establishment of disrespect, etc. [for oneself]
                                1. It does no harm to the body
                                2. It makes no sense to get angry in connection to the hatred of others
                                3. It makes no sense to get angry with obstacles to acquisition
                                    1. The meaninglessness of the acquisitions themselves
                                    2. Ceasing to create more harm
                                    3. Demonstrating their meaninglessness with an example
                                    4. Their specific kind of meaninglessness
                                    5. Objection and response
                                    6. Establishing the fact
                                4. Disrespectful beings are inappropriate as objects of anger
                        2. Stopping impatience with the production of negative actions towards one’s own side
                            1. Properly considering those who criticize or harm the dharma
                            2. The patience of putting up with harm-doers
                                1. The marks of anger are not established
                                2. Examining its irrationality
                                3. Examining one’s own faults
                                4. Consideration of the results
                                    1. Merit will not be diminished
                                    2. Suffering will be averted
                                    3. Great benefit will be achieved
                        3. Stopping impatience with the production of good towards one’s enemies
                            1. Abandoning impatience with their being praised and renowned
                                1. Abandoning impatience since they cause one’s own happiness
                                2. Abandoning impatience since they cause others’ happiness
                            2. Abandoning impatience with their achieving happiness
                            3. Abandoning impatience with their getting acquisitions
                                1. When they get what they wish for
                                2. Not wishing for them not to have it
                    3. Ceasing anger towards those who obstruct desirable dharmas
                        1. Abandoning impatience with those who obstruct accomplishing negative actions towards one’s enemies
                        2. Abandoning impatience with those who obstruct good for oneself and one’s own side
                            1. Abandoning impatience with those who obstruct worldly dharmas
                                1. Not regarding obstruction to worldly praise and reputation as harmful
                                    1. Praise and reputation do not bring benefit or happiness
                                    2. Mere joy is not meaningful
                                    3. Misconceived grasping for meaning
                                    4. Misconceived happiness
                                        1. The mere sound is inappropriate as a cause of joy
                                        2. The intention of the one giving praise is inappropriate as a cause of joy
                                        3. Establishing that by a counterfactual
                                        4. Summary
                                2. Regarding the cessation of worldly dharmas as beneficial
                                    1. It prevents rebirth in the lower realms
                                    2. It accomplishes liberation
                            2. Abandoning impatience with those who obstruct merit
                                1. It is contradictory to be angry with someone obstructing merit
                                2. They are not actually an obstruction
                                3. Considering them as objects of respect
                                    1. One should respect them for their own qualities
                                        1. They are greatly beneficial
                                        2. Overlooking the factor of intention
                                        3. Regarding them, therefore, as like the Teacher
                                            1. Brief scriptural presentation
                                            2. Establishing the fact of that
                                            3. They are equal as objects of respect
                                            4. Abandoning an objection
                                            5. Summary
                                                1. The same result
                                                2. Different qualities
                                                3. Summarizing the fact that sentient beings are an excellent field of merit
                                    2. One should respect them out of one’s faith in the Buddhas
                                        1. The Buddhas treat sentient beings as their own
                                            1. Briefly expressing this
                                            2. One should be patient with harm-doers
                                            3. Abandoning self-importance
                                            4. Abandoning harm
                                            5. Confessing needless faults before the Sage
                                            6. Desisting from now on
                                        2. The Buddhas treat sentient beings as themselves
            2. Keeping in mind the results of patience
                1. Brief presentation
                2. An example from the perspective of the result
                3. The example is far outweighed
                4. Summary enumeration of results

    4. Effort
        1. Developing enthusiasm for effort
        2. The nature of effort
        3. Abandoning opposing factors
            1. Summarizing the opposing factors
            2. Abandoning the laziness of non-application
                1. Examining the cause of non-application and averting it
                2. Examining the faults of this life and averting them
                    1. Having certainty about impermanence
                    2. An example of seeing this
                    3. It will befall one
                    4. Impossible to hold back time
                    5. The time of death is too late
                    6. Explaining the impossibility of holding back time
                    7. Describing the actual kinds of suffering
                3. Examining the sufferings of future lives and averting them
                    1. Suffering is certain to arise
                    2. A difficult consideration
                    3. A mass of contradictions
                    4. Exhortation for the means of liberation from that
            3. Abandoning the laziness of negative behaviour
            4. Abandoning the laziness of despondency
                1. The antidotes and their result briefly explained
                2. The antidote to the despondency of thinking that one lacks the cause
                3. The antidote to the despondency of impatience with application
                    1. The difficulties have great benefit
                    2. It is not suffering
                    3. It is actually happiness
        4. Fully developing effort
            1. Briefly
            2. Extensively
                1. Developing the array of powers
                    1. The power of motivation
                        1. Object
                            1. Abandoning the faults of oneself and others
                            2. Accomplishing all good qualities
                            3. Kinds of acts
                        2. Result of motivation
                        3. Cause of motivation
                            1. The result of mixed actions
                            2. The ripening of purely white actions
                            3. The ripening of purely black actions
                        4. Conclusion
                    2. The power of steadfastness
                        1. Stable preparation
                                1. Method of not being deterred
                                2. Method of preparation
                                3. The fault of not doing it
                        2. Stable engagement
                            1. Briefly
                            2. Pride in actions
                                1. Briefly
                                2. Extensively
                                3. Benefitting others engaged in inferior actions
                            3. Pride in ability
                                1. The logic of reliance
                                    1. Showing the fault by example
                                    2. The cause of that arising
                                    3. The greatness of that pride
                                    4. Striving to rely on that
                                    5. If one does not strive, one’s vows will be broken
                                2. The means of reliance
                                    1. The nature of antidotal pride
                                    2. ‘Pride’ here does not mean defiled pride
                                    3. Developing enthusiasm by praising antidotal pride
                                    4. Pride in overcoming the defilements

                    3. The power of joy
                        1. One should enjoy the play of good actions themselves without concern for a result
                        2. Consideration of the result: enjoyment
                            1. Certainty that the result will come
                            2. Consideration of what is better
                        3. How to apply the power of joy
                    4. The power of rest
                        1. Temporary rest
                        2. Finishing rest
                2. Dedication
                    1. Dedication to concern
                    2. Dedication to mindfulness and clear comprehension
                    3. Not allowing circumstances to arise which oppose those two
                    4. Overcoming their arising
                    5. Subsequently accomplishing supporting actions
                3. Self-control

    5. Meditation
        1. Abandoning contradictory factors
            1. Briefly
            2. Abandoning the world
                1. The causes of not abandoning the world
                2. The greatness of the antidote to those causes
                3. How the antidotes are accomplished
                    1. Establishing non-attachment towards sentient beings
                        1. The faults of the subject with attachment
                            1. One does not attain the desired person
                            2. One is disturbed when one does not see the desired person
                            3. One’s misery knows no end
                            4. One does not attain liberation
                            5. Freedom and opportunity are wasted
                        2. The faults of the desired object
                            1. They destroy great benefits
                            2. They lead one to lower rebirths
                            3. They are unreliable
                            4. They are difficult to please
                            5. One does not get any benefit
                            6. One engages in faults
                            7. Summary of faults
                            8. How to abandon them
                    2. Establishing non-attachment towards possessions, etc
                        1. The faults of the subject
                        2. The faults of the object
                            1. Volatility
                            2. Praise and criticism are neither beneficial nor harmful
                4. The faults of worldly involvement
                5. The qualities of non-distraction
                    1. Friends
                    2. Places
                    3. Livelihood
                    4. Discriminations
                        1. Impurity
                        2. The inevitability of separation from friends
                        3. They are not truly friends
                        4. They are unreliable
                    5. Non-distraction
            3. Giving up conceptual discrimination
                1. Examining how the result is destroyed
                2. Examining the impure nature
                    1. Impurity connected with the burial ground
                        1. The result is not what one thinks
                            1. Uncleanliness
                            2. Obstructing the door to liberation
                        2. It is nothing other than what is discarded in the burial ground
                        3. It is not logical to selfishly protect that
                        4. It is not logical to attach ornaments to it
                        5. It is not logical to be so afraid of it
                        6. Adorning it with clothes does not make it desirable
                    2. Impurity connected with the living
                        1. Seeing their impurity directly
                        2. Making certain of this with reasoning
                            1. Establishing impurity by the cause which produces impurity
                            2. Analysing impurity by its impure result
                            3. It makes no sense to want impurity
                            4. Establishing the impurity of one’s own body
                            5. Summarizing freedom from attachment by applying the meditation on impurity
                    3. Negating the characteristics of purity
                3. Considering how harm is abandoned by its cause
                    1. Explanation
                    2. Elaboration
                        1. The desirable object itself is not attained
                        2. Other faults connected with that
        2. Developing joy in solitude
            1. Its unique preeminence
                1. Explanation
                2. No opposing conditions
                3. Supporting conditions
            2. Its unique happiness

        3. Focussing the mind on samatha
            1. Equalizing self and others
                1. Brief explanation
                2. Equality of subjection to suffering from self-grasping
                    1. Explanation
                    2. Accomplishing it
                3. Equality in suffering as the object of abandonment
                    1. Brief presentation of the proof
                    2. Establishing the pervasion of that
                    3. Establishing the necessary criterion of the pervasion
                        1. The error that follows from the different times
                        2. Establishing that grasping the self as singular is error
                        3. The error that follows from the parts of the body
                        4. Abandoning the consequence that the example is not established
                    4. Abandoning objections
                    5. Summarizing the definitive meaning of valid cognition
                    6. Abandoning objections that it is not definitive
                4. The qualities of meditating on equality
                    1. Undertaking the benefit of others with happiness
                    2. Establishing that to accomplish the benefit of others is the supreme happiness
                    3. Pacifying one’s own arrogance
                    4. Disregarding the results
                    5. Advice to strive in practising this
                5. The possibility of meditating on equality
            2. Exchanging oneself and others
                1. Brief description of the essential characteristics
                    1. Establishing the aspiration
                    2. Establishing the application
                2. Detailed explanation of the essential characteristics
                    1. Accepting others
                        1. The possibility of exchanging oneself and others
                        2. Pacifying arrogance
                        3. Disregarding the results
                        4. Advice to strive in practising this
                        5. A particular practice for the benefit of others
                        6. Accomplishing by habituation
                        7. Liberation of self and others from suffering
                    2. Abandoning clinging to ‘I’
                        1. Out of attachment to one’s body, one is afraid of things which are not frightening
                        2. Getting involved in all kinds of nonvirtue
                        3. The faults of putting oneself first and qualities of putting others first
                            1. Various faults and qualities
                            2. The faults of self-cherishing
                                1. Invisible faults
                                2. Visible faults
                                3. Summary
                                4. Abandoning the cause of fear—self-grasping
                        4. Summary
                            1. The purpose of exchanging
                            2. Nature
                            3. Specific intention
                            4. Stopping incorrect application distinct from the correct application
                            5. Establishing the correct application
                3. Detailed explanation of the practices related to aspiration
                    1. Brief explanation
                    2. Meditation on envy
                        1. Meditating on envy of worldly dharmas
                        2. Meditating on envy of good qualities
                        3. The outcome of meditating like this
                            1. Developing the perspective of the assumed self
                            2. Having patience with the harm they may cause
                            3. Disregarding one’s good qualities which are unhelpful
                            4. Having sympathy for those beings who are destined for rebirth in the lower realms
                            5. Abandoning conceit and giving up aggression towards the learned
                    3. Meditation on competitiveness
                    4. Meditation on pride
                        1. Types of pride
                        2. The goodness of thinking about that
                        3. Having so meditated, the practice to be relied on
                        4. Faults unrelated to pride
                    5. The results of the meditations
                        1. The fault of looking after the unexchanged self
                        2. The qualities of exchanging self and other
                        3. Experiencing the results
                        4. Making an effort to meditate for the sake of the results
                4. Detailed explanation of the practices related to application
                    1. How to accomplish the practice
                        1. General statement
                        2. The practice for the benefit and happiness of others
                        3. Taking on all faults
                        4. Completely taking a lowly status for the benefit of others
                        5. Concise summary of the practice
                        6. Correctly protecting the mind
                    2. Controlling the mind for practice
                        1. In respect of subjugating the mind
                        2. The faults of activities for one’s own sake
                            1. Recalling the meaningless actions of the past
                            2. Not giving away any control
                            3. The practice of abandonment
                            4. The fault of not abandoning
                            5. Contemplating the faults of that, i.e. applying the conditions for subjugation
                        3. The faults of taking the body as an object of grasping
                            1. Dissatisfaction
                                1. The faults of dissatisfaction
                                2. The qualities of satisfaction
                            2. Immobility
                            3. Confusion
                                1. Confusion over good and bad
                                2. Confusion over praise and blame
                                3. Abandoning an objection to this
                            4. The necessity of a faulty support
                        4. The practice of controlling the mind

    6. Wisdom
        1. Explaining that wisdom is the principal
            1. The reason wisdom is the principal
            2. Advice to strive in this
        2. It is the wisdom of the emptiness of intrinsic nature
            1. Establishing the object as empty
                1. The nature of the two truths in our tradition
                    1. Distinguishing the two truths
                        1. Basis of the distinction
                        2. Meaning of the distinction
                        3. Ascertaining the number
                        4. Definitions
                    2. Their characteristics
                    3. The valid cognitions which ascertain those characteristics
                        1. Distinguishing the types of conceptual thought
                        2. The graduations of refuter
                        3. Abandoning objections about these graduations
                            1. Abandoning the objection that practice is meaningless
                            2. Abandoning the objection that there are no distinctions in understanding
                2. Abandoning objections
                    1. Abandoning the objections of Vaibhāṣikas
                        1. Abandoning objections of contradiction with valid cognition
                        2. Abandoning objections of contradiction with the textual tradition of the Bhagavān
                    2. Abandoning the objections of Sautrāntikas
                        1. To do with the bases of accumulation
                        2. To do with rebirth
                        3. To do with karma
                        4. To do with the distinction between saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
                    3. Abandoning objections of the Vijñaptimātrins
                        1. Non-establishment of the subject
                            1. Abandoning objections of the False Representationalists
                            2. Abandoning objections of the True Representationalists
                                1. Objecting that mind is an appearance
                                    1. Presenting the objection in brief
                                    2. Establishing pervasion though scriptures
                                        1. Scriptural reference
                                        2. An example of the agency of cognition
                                        3. Conclusion
                                    3. Settling that with reasoning
                                        1. Abandoning uncertainty with the illumination of a lamp
                                        2. Abandoning uncertainty with the spontaneous arising of blue
                                2. Rejecting arguments that mind is self-aware
                                    1. The nonexistence of the general concept
                                    2. Rejecting the perception of its existence
                                    3. There is no inference to the conclusion
                                        1. The error in the reason of the effect
                                        2. The error in the reason of its intrinsic nature
                                        3. Abandoning objections
            2. Establishing the object as empty
                1. Establishing subject cognition as the path
                    1. Objection
                    2. Response
                        1. A partial knowledge of illusion is not the antidote
                        2. Knowledge that everything is illusion is the antidote
                            1. Abandoning clinging to existence
                            2. Abandoning clinging to nonexistence
                            3. The reason for these
                        3. How that is the arising of the wisdom without dualistic appearances
                        4. Engaging in activity does not depend on effort
                            1. The appearance of the Conqueror’s kāya to trainees who have purified their streams of being
                            2. Those appearances engage in benefit
                            3. Abandoning an objection
                                1. Presenting the objection
                                2. The logic which refutes the objection
                                3. A counter objection
                                4. Establishing the pervasion for the counter objection
                2. Abandoning the objections of śrāvakas
                    1. Presenting the objection
                    2. The scriptural criterion for the path
                    3. Establishing the [Mahāyāna] scriptures as Buddha’s word
                        1. We have the same criteria for accepting [texts as scriptures]
                        2. We have the same criteria for rejecting [texts as scriptures]
                    4. Establishing them as definitive meaning
                        1. The error for the śrāvaka tradition in the monk who has abandoned defilements
                        2. The error for the śrāvaka tradition in a nirvāṇa in which suffering is abandoned
                        3. Overcoming objections to that
                            1. The existence of the suffering of this life
                                1. Objection
                                2. Response
                                3. Response to a counter objection
                            2. The existence of the suffering of future lives
                                1. Presenting the objection
                                2. The existence of craving itself
                                3. The existence of its cause, sensation
                                4. The logical conclusion
                    5. Summarizing the meaning of this section
                    6. Explaining extensively the criteria for establishing the Mahāyāna scriptures as Buddha’s word
                        1. We have the same criteria
                        2. To abandon it because of not understanding it is an error
                        3. The function of the two cognitions
                            1. Generating the result which will become supreme
                            2. Therefore you have no objections to our position
                            3. Meditation on emptiness functions as an antidote
                            4. It is not something to be afraid of
                                1. It is not a cause of suffering
                                2. Having no fear
            3. How to engage in meditation on emptiness
                1. The general explanation of individual non-self in the six elements
                2. Refuting the self of the skandhas and elements, etc. as designated by tīrthikas
                    1. Refuting Sāṃkhyas
                        1. General refutation of the individual consciousness
                            1. The consequence of its permanence
                            2. Establishing the pervasion
                                1. The violation of its intrinsic nature
                                2. The absurd consequence
                                3. Conclusion
                            3. Abandoning objections
                                1. It is unreasonable for cognition of form to perceive sound
                                2. This has the same fault that was previously explained
                                3. It is unreasonable to call it the same thing
                                4. The example is not established
                                5. Not conceivable as a singularity
                        2. Refuting temporary multiplicity
                        3. Refuting its single nature
                            1. Question
                            2. Answer
                                1. The consequence that all beings are one
                                2. The consequence that the mirror of mind and individual consciousnesses are one
                                3. The general case is not established
                    2. Refuting Naiyāyikas
                        1. Showing the consequence which refutes a self with a material nature
                        2. Establishing the pervasion
                        3. Summarized meaning

                3. Abandoning objections to non-self
                    1. Abandoning the objection that the connection of actions and effects is not logical
                        1. Presenting the objection
                        2. Our positions are the same
                        3. Actual response
                        4. Abandoning contradiction to scripture
                        5. Abandoning another objection
                        6. Summarized meaning
                    2. Abandoning the objection of objects of cultivating compassion being illogical
                        1. Objection
                        2. Response
                            1. Establishing that sentient beings are designated
                            2. Abandoning an objection
                                1. The independence of the substantially established individual
                                2. The mere designation is not to be abandoned
                            3. Abandoning a contradiction in our own words
                            4. Abandoning that they are the same
                                        
                4. Refuting the understanding of the skandhas and elements as self with the four foundations of mindfulness
                    1. Mindfulness of the body
                        1. The individual parts are not the body
                        2. An existent body which possesses the parts is not established
                            1. Refuting that each part is connected to it
                            2. Refuting a connection throughout the entire self
                            3. Summarizing the logic of that
                            4. The body is deluded conception
                            5. Establishing the delusion
                                1. The cause of the delusion
                                2. The deluded cognition
                                3. General summary
                    2. Mindfulness of sensations
                        1. The non-establishment of the intrinsic nature of sensations
                            1. The non-establishment of suffering as ultimate
                            2. The non-establishment of happiness as ultimate
                            3. Abandoning objections
                                1. The consequence that sensations would be experienced
                                2. If that reason were not established, it would be no different to happiness
                            4. Conditionality
                            5. Connecting with the yogic activity of analysis
                        2. The non-establishment of its cause: contact
                            1. Objects not meeting with sense organs
                                1. There is no contact with the coarse
                                2. There is no contact with the subtle [particles]
                                    1. Stating the consequence
                                    2. Establishing the reason
                                    3. Establishing the pervasion
                                    4. Conclusion
                            2. Not meeting with consciousness
                            3. A composite completely refuted
                            4. Summary conclusion
                            5. The point of establishing that
                        3. The non-establishment of the object of sensation
                        4. The non-establishment of the subject
                            1. No experiencing mind
                            2. No self-experience
                            3. No experiencer apart from those
                            4. Concluding summary
                    3. Mindfulness of mind
                        1. The nature of mind is not established
                        2. Perception of the five consciousnesses is not established
                    4. Mindfulness of dharmas
                        1. Establishing all as non-arising
                        2. Abandoning objections
                            1. Abandoning the objection that there is no relative
                            2. Abandoning the objection that this ascertainment entails an infinite regress
                                1. A general comment on the division of object and subject
                                2. If the non-arising of the subject depends upon a further understanding, there is an infinite regress
                                3. Our position does not have that fault

            4. Ceasing to grasp at true existence
                1. There is no reason that establishes all dharmas as having inherent nature
                    1. General presentation
                    2. Extensive explanation
                        1. Refuting the reason of mutual dependence
                            1. There is neither one
                            2. Applying the reason with an example
                        2. Refuting the reason of cognition of the effect
                2. Refutation of the tīrthikas’ position that the arising of the inherent nature of all dharmas is established
                    1. The main teaching on refuting an arising with intrinsic nature
                        1. Refuting arising from no cause
                            1. General explanation
                            2. Differences of effect in relation to cause
                            3. Differences of cause in relation to cause
                            4. Differences of power in relation to cause
                        2. Refuting arising from other
                            1. Refuting arising from an impermanent other
                                1. Effect before the cause
                                2. Effect simultaneous with the cause
                                3. Effect after the cause
                            2. Refuting arising from a permanent other
                                1. Refuting arising from Īśvara
                                    1. Īśvara is not established
                                        1. Refuting Īśvara as the elements
                                        2. Refuting Īśvara as space
                                        3. Refuting Īśvara as self
                                        4. Refuting Īśvara as inconceivable
                                    2. Effects are impossible
                                        1. Refuting a permanent effect
                                        2. Refuting an impermanent effect
                                    3. Contradictions in his being a creator
                                        1. Contradictory to a temporary effect
                                        2. Establishing the pervasion by Īśvara’s independence
                                        3. Refuting his dependence
                                            1. Everything being an effect of Īśvara contradicts his dependence
                                            2. Dependence is contrary to Īśvara
                                                1. Establishing the concurrence of conditions as the cause
                                                2. Autonomy is violated
                                                3. He would be under the power of desire
                                2. Refuting the Vaiśeṣika tradition of arising from sempiternal particles
                        3. Refuting arising from self
                            1. Formulating the position of the other [i.e. Sāṃkhya] tradition
                                1. A general explanation
                                2. The nature of the primal substance
                                3. The nature of its effects
                            2. The error in that
                                1. A general expression of the objection
                                    1. Refuting the primal substance
                                    2. Refuting its qualities
                                    3. Refuting its effects
                                2. Refuting pleasure and so forth being external
                                    1. Refuting by not perceiving the appearance
                                    2. Refuting an external cause of pleasure and so forth
                                        1. Recalling the logic that was already completed
                                        2. The idea contradicts your own words
                                        3. Not preexisting in its basis
                                        4. Not existing in reality
                                3. A permanent primal substance is unreasonable
                                    1. Refuting by not perceiving the appearance
                                    2. Gross and subtle are contradictory
                                    3. Establishing its contingent states as impermanent
                                    4. Establishing the primal substance as impermanent
                                4. Contradictions in an existent arising
                                    1. Presenting the position to be refuted
                                    2. The position’s uncertainty
                                    3. Mixing up the roles
                                    4. Abandoning objections
                                        1. The roles are the same
                                        2. Contradictory to worldly confusion
                                        3. The consequence that the role of the effect is a delusion
            
                    2. Abandoning objections to the middle way
                        1. Setting out the objections
                        2. Response to the first prasaṅga: our position is not a valid cognition with a positive affirmation
                        3. Response to the second prasaṅga: showing that the pervasion is not established, for even though there is an analysis, it is not contrary to valid cognition

                3. Showing that all dharmas arise merely through dependent origination
                    1. A summary of the refutation of the four [kinds of] arising
                    2. Showing that there is no arising or ceasing, coming or going
                    3. The implication of that: that which is dependently originated is mere illusion
                        1. Showing that dependent origination is like an illusion
                        2. Showing dependent origination
                            1. Presenting the reason
                            2. Showing the forward pervasion
                            3. The example of that
                            4. The logic
                        3. Establishing the pervasion
                            1. The logic
                                1. Refuting something existent arising as an effect
                                2. Refuting something nonexistent arising as an effect
                                    1. Presenting the logic in brief
                                    2. The contradiction in the possibility of something nonexistent being the cause for an object
                                    3. Refuting [the cessation of] the object itself
                            2. Making certain of the reason
                                1. Freedom from the two extremes
                                2. Abiding is like an illusion
                                3. The sameness of existence and pacification
            5. The result of meditation on emptiness
                1. Benefit of self
                    1. Pacifying attachment
                        1. The non-establishment of the eight worldly dharmas, the objects of attachment
                        2. Ending conditioned existence, which depends upon these
                    2. Pacifying suffering
                        1. A summary of visible sufferings
                        2. The invisible sufferings of other lives
                            1. The sufferings of the lower realms
                            2. Continuously experiencing suffering
                                1. The roots of suffering have not been pacified
                                2. One does not have the means to dispel it
                                3. There are many obstacles
                                    1. Outer obstacles
                                    2. Inner obstacles
                                4. It is difficult to rely on the supports
                                5. It is difficult to abandon its causes
                            3. Not knowing that one is suffering
                            4. The kinds of suffering which will be experienced
                2. Benefit of others
                    1. Pacifying suffering
                    2. Pacifying attachment

5. The subsequent results of the practice: dedication of merit
    1. Dedication related to the means
    2. Dedication for the benefit of others
        1. Dedication for worldly benefit
            1. General dedication
            2. Dedication for the benefit of specific lower realms
                1. Dedication for the benefit of hell-beings
                    1. Dedication for their own pacification of suffering
                        1. Dedication for general pacification
                        2. Dedication for pacifying the cold hells
                        3. Dedication for pacifying the hot hells
                            1. Dedication for pacifying the suffering of the main hells
                            2. Dedication for pacifying the neighbouring hells
                    2. Dedication for their pacification by others
                        1. Pacification by Vajrapāṇi’s power
                        2. Pacification by Padmapāṇi’s compassion
                        3. Pacification by Mañjughoṣa’s emanation
                        4. Pacification by the force of the other bodhisattvas’ proximity
                2. Dedication for the benefit of animals
                3. Dedication for the benefit of ghosts
            3. Dedication for the benefit of the higher realms
                1. Freedom from suffering
                2. Attaining wishes
                    1. General dedication
                        1. Attaining wealth and possessions
                        2. Entering the path of perfection
                        3. Attaining worldly happiness
                    2. Dedication specific to monastics
        2. Dedication for transcendental benefit
    3. Dedication for the benefit of self
    4. Dedication for the teachings to remain as a source of happiness
    5. Homage of remembrance of kind ones



