
1. Introductory Topics
    1. Meaning of the name
    2. Translators' Homage
2. Preliminaries - The Seven Branch Prayer
    1. Prostration and homage
        1. Extensive presentation of homage
            1. Physical
            2. Mental
            3. Verbal
    2. Offerings
        1. Quantifiable
        2. Unsurpassable
    3. Confession
    4. Rejoicing
    5. Requesting the wheel of Dharma to be turned
    6. Supplicating buddhas not to pass into nirvana
    7. Dedication of all fruits to enlightenment
3. Main Part - The Actual Aspiration
    1. Aspiration for a pure intention
        1. The intention to offer to all the buddhas
        2. To fulfill their intentions
        3. To purify buddha realms
        4. To benefit beings
    2. Aspiration never to forget bodhicitta
        1. Aspiring to remember previous lives
        2. Aspiring to become a renunciate
        3. Aspiring to train in the general conduct and pure discipline
        4. Aspiring to teach the Dharma in various languages
        5. Aspiring to exertion in virtue
        6. Aspiring not to forget bodhicitta through these five causes
        7. Aspiring to be free from negative conditions
    3. Aspiration to be free from defilements
    4. Aspiration to lead beings to benefit and happiness
    5. Aspiration to wear the bodhisattva armor
    6. Aspiration to be with friends of similar karmic maturity
    7. Aspiration to rely on spiritual friends and thus to please them
    8. Aspiration to make offerings to the buddhas
    9. Aspiration to retain the genuine Dharma
    10. Aspiration to become an inexhaustible treasury
    11. Aspiration to engage in different methods for good actions
        1. Engage in seeing the buddhas in their pure realms
        2. Engage in the speech of the buddhas
        3. Engage in the turning of the Dharma wheel
        4. Entering into all aeons
        5. Engage in seeing the tathagatas
        6. Engage in the sphere of activity of the buddhas
        7. Engage in producing and entering pure realms
        8. Engage in going before the tathagatas
    12. Aspiration for the powers of enlightenment
        1. The power of swift miracles
        2. The power of the yana / door
        3. The power of conduct
        4. The power of all-pervasive love
        5. The power of merit
        6. The power of wisdom
        7. The power of knowledge
        8. The power of methods
        9. The power of samadhi
    13. Aspiration to practice remedies to pacify the obscurations
    14. Aspiration for enlightened activity
    15. Aspiration to enter the training
        1. Emulating the buddhas
        2. Emulating the bodhisattvas: Samantabhadra
        3. Emulating the bodhisattvas: Manjushri
    16. Summary / concluding aspirations
    17. Extent of aspirations
4. The Benefits of Making Aspirations
    1. Brief presentation
    2. Detailed / extensive presentation
        1. Free from going to the lower realms
        2. Never having unwholesome friends
        3. Seeing Amitabha soon
        4. Acquiring all benefits for practice
        5. Be sustained in physical and mental happiness
        6. Present life will go well
        7. Become like Samantabhadra
        8. Negative acts will be purified
        9. Possession of wisdom
        10. Having an attractive form
        11. Not being overpowered by aggressors
        12. Being respected by all
        13. Quick completion of paths and bhumis
    3. The benefits in brief
5. Dedication of Merit
    1. Entering into the dedication of the supreme bodhisattvas
    2. Entering into the dedication of the buddhas
    3. Dedication towards actualizing the result
    4. Dedication towards receiving a prophecy from the Buddha
    5. Dedication to accomplish the benefit of beings
6. Concluding Dedication
