In the language of India, it is Suhrillekha. In Tibetan, it is bshes pa’i spring yig.
I bow down to Manjushri Kumarabhuta.

1
O virtuous and worthy one with intrinsic qualities, 
Merit arises from hearing the words of the Sugata. 
Aspiring to this, it is appropriate that you
Should listen to these few noble verses that I have put together.

2
Just as an image of the Sugata, though it be made of wood 
And whatever it may be like, is venerated by the wise,
So likewise do not despise this which is based upon
The teachings of the sacred dharma, though its poetry may be poor.

3
Although you may have already heard
And understood in your heart many of the Great Sage’s words, 
Is it not the case that something made from limestone
Is made whiter by the light of the midnight moon?

4
The Buddha, dharma and sangha,
Giving, moral discipline and the gods are the six things to be remembered.
You should remember the multitude of qualities of each of these, 
Which have been thoroughly expounded by the Conqueror.

5
Always practise the ten paths of virtuous deeds 
Through body, speech and mind.
Refrain from alcohol and likewise 
Thoroughly delight in a virtuous livelihood.
6
Knowing that wealth is unstable and devoid of essence, 
Rightly bestow gifts upon bhikshus, brahmins,
The poor and friends. For the next life
There is no better friend than transcendent giving.

7
You should practise moral discipline which is 
Unimpaired, blameless, unmixed and unsullied. 
Morality is said to be the foundation of all virtues,
Just as the earth is the support of both the motile and immotile.

8
Increase measureless transcendent giving, moral discipline, 
Patience, effort, absorption and wisdom.
Become a Lord of Conquerors
Who has transcended the ocean of existence.

9
One who venerates his parents
Possesses the caste of Brahma and the acharyas. 
One will win veneration and fame
And later attain the higher realms.

10
Abandon killing, theft, sex, lying,
Alcohol, attachment to food at improper times, 
Enjoyment of high seats and beds and all kinds 
Of songs, dances and adornments.

11
Possessing these eight limbs in emulation of 
The moral discipline of the arhats,
The uposatha bestows the beautiful form
Of a desire realm god upon men and women.

12
Avarice, cunning, attachment, laziness, 
Arrogance, desire, hatred and pride
Regarding one’s caste, form, learning or youth, or 
Great power: look upon conceit in these as enemies.

13
The Sage has said that concern is the source of nectar 
And unconcern is the source of death.
Hence in order to increase your virtue, 
With devotion always practise concern.

14
Even one who previously was unconcerned 
But later became concerned
Will be completely resplendent like the moon free from clouds, 
As with Nanda, Angulimala, Darshaka and Udayana.

15
Since there is no austerity like patience,
You must give anger no opportunity to arise. 
By giving up anger, the stage of a non­returner 
Will be attained. Thus the Buddha has said.

16
‘I was abused by him, struck by him, defeated by him. 
He stole my property.’
Harbouring such resentment leads to trouble.
One who gives up resentment sleeps happily.

17
Recognize thoughts to be like
Drawings made on water, earth or stone.
The first of these is best for those with disturbing emotions 
And the last for those who desire dharma.

18
The Conqueror taught that there are three kinds 
Of speech possessed by people—pleasant, truthful 
And false—which resemble
Honey, flowers and excrement. Abandon the last of these.

19
Light destined for light, darkness
Destined for darkness, light destined for darkness 
And darkness destined for light:
Such are the four persons; be as the first of these.

20
People should be understood to be like mangoes: 
Classified as ‘unripe but seemingly ripe’,
‘Ripened but seemingly unripe’, ‘unripe and appearing unripe’ 
And ‘ripe and appearing ripe’.

21
Do not gaze upon another’s wife;
When you see her, think of her according to her age as your mother, daughter
Or sister. If desire persists, 
Meditate on her actual impurity.

22
Protect the vacillating mind as you would learning, similar to a child, 
As treasure or like life itself.
Have revulsion for sensual pleasures which are like 
A snake, poison, a weapon, an enemy or fire.

23
Desires produce destruction.
Since the Lord of Conquerors declared those to be like kimbu fruits, 
Abandon them. Worldlings are fettered
In the prison of samsara by such iron chains.

24
Of the one who conquers the ever­
Unstable and wavering objects of the six senses
And the one who conquers the enemy army in battle, 
The wise know the first to be a greater hero.

25
Look upon the body of a young maiden on its own to be foul­ smelling,
With impurities issuing from the nine doors, 
Like a vessel of all impurities, difficult to satisfy,
Covered with skin and with jewellery on the outside.

26
Just as the insect­-ridden leper,
For the sake of comfort, huddles by the fire,
Yet it brings no peace, know that those who cling to desires 
Are also like him.

27
In order to see the ultimate, meditate on
Making the mind correctly understand substantial things. 
There is no other dharma
With a similar quality to that.

28
Although a person may possess caste, good appearance and learning, 
He will not be esteemed if he lacks wisdom and morality.
However, one who possesses these two qualities is venerated, 
Even if he lacks the other qualities.

29
O knower of the world, gain and loss, 
Happiness and unhappiness, fame and infamy,
Praise and blame—the eight worldly dharmas—
Are not objects for your mind. Hence, be impartial to them.

30
You should not commit sins for the sake of 
Brahmins, monks, gods, guests,
Parents, children, queens or entourage.
There is no one to share their full maturation in hell.

31
Though some sinful deeds performed
Will not harm you immediately as would a weapon, 
When the time of death comes,
The results from sinful actions will be clear.

32
Faith, morality, giving, flawless learning, 
Self ­respect, shame and
Wisdom are the seven riches as the Sage has well said. 
Recognize other ordinary riches to be meaningless.

33
Gambling, attending gatherings, 
Laziness, reliance on sinful friends,
Alcohol and nocturnal wandering are bad pursuits
Which will damage one’s reputation. Abandon these six.

34
Contentment is the most excellent amongst all riches, 
As the teacher of gods and men has taught.
Always have contentment. If one has contentment, 
Even without riches one will have true wealth.

35
Gracious one, sufferings accord with the number
Of possessions one has. Those with few desires will not have many. 
The more heads the naga lords have,
The more sufferings these will bring.

36
One whose character relates to oneself as an enemy like an executioner; 
One who disrespects her husband like a great lady;
One who steals even small things like a thief; 
One should avoid these three types of wife.

37
One who is harmonious like a sister, 
Caring about one like a dear friend,
Wishing to benefit one like a mother and helping one 
Like an assistant, should be honoured like a familial deity.

38
With the understanding that food is like medicine, 
Approach it without desire or hatred;
Not to be full, not out of pride
And not for vanity, but only for maintaining the body.

39
Lord of reason, recite until the end of the day 
And in the early and later parts of the night. 
Then, so that even sleep will not be fruitless, 
Sleep mindfully in the middle period.

40
On love, compassion, joy
And equanimity, always correctly meditate. 
Even if the supreme is not gained now,
One will obtain the bliss of the Brahma world.

41
Sensual pleasure, joy and bliss, and suffering
Are completely abandoned through the four absorptions, by which four,
An equal status to that of the Brahma, Clear Light, 
Flourishing Virtue And Great Fruition gods will be obtained.

42
Constancy, full motivation, no opposition, 
Basis of qualities and primary basis:
Virtues and non­virtues are amplified through these five factors. 
Therefore diligently engage them in virtuous conduct.

43
Understand that a pinch of salt changes the taste of a 
Little water but not that of the river Ganges; 
Similarly a small sinful deed
With vast roots of virtue.

44
Agitation and remorse, maliciousness, dullness and 
Sleepiness, yearning for desires, and doubts:
Know these five obscurations to be thieves 
Which will steal the wealth of virtue.

45
Faith, energy, mindfulness,
Concentration and wisdom are the highest dharma. 
Assiduously perform these five,
Called powers and faculties. You will indeed reach the summit.

46
‘Sickness, ageing, death, separation from what is dear
And similarly actions are mine alone and not yet transcended.’ 
Repeatedly considering this
Is the remedy by which there will be no conceit.

47
If you really desire the higher realms or liberation, 
Cultivate the true view.
Someone with wrong views, although they may practise goodness, 
The full ripening of all that will contain torment.

48
Understand that the true nature of humans is unhappiness, 
Impermanence, selflessness, and impurity.
Without the foundations of mindfulness 
One is destroyed by the four opposite views.

49
It is taught: ‘Form is not a self.’
Self does not have a form. Self does not abide in form. 
Form does not abide in a self. Similarly,
Recognize that the four remaining aggregates are also empty.

50
The aggregates did not come about through their own wishes, nor from time,
Nor from an intrinsic nature, nor from their own essence, 
Nor from a creator god, nor without cause.
Understand they arise from ignorance, actions and craving.

51
Grasping at moral discipline and asceticism as supreme, 
The mistaken view of the body and doubts:
Know that always practising these three 
Obstructs the door to the city of liberation.

52
Liberation depends upon oneself.
Since there is nothing others can do to help,
With hearing, moral discipline and meditative absorption, 
Strive in the Four Truths.

53
In superior moral discipline, superior wisdom
And superior contemplation, one must constantly train. 
More than one hundred and fifty trainings
Are truly included in these three.

54
Lord, mindfulness pertaining to the body
Was thoroughly taught by the Sugata to be the only path. 
Protect it well through attentiveness.
Deterioration of mindfulness will destroy the entire dharma.

55
Life has many dangers. If it is no more permanent 
Than a bubble of water blown by the wind,
Why should exhalation follow inhalation,
Or waking follow falling asleep? It is a great wonder.

56
The body ends up as ashen, desiccated, putrefied, 
Or ultimately befouled. It is without essence.
It will completely decay, crumble or decompose. 
Know that its nature is to disintegrate.

57
The earth, Meru and the oceans will burn up 
In an inferno of seven suns.
If not even the ashes will remain of these bodies,
What need is there to say anything of very frail humans?

58
Accordingly, all these are impermanent, devoid of self, 
Without a refuge, without a protector and without a home. 
Because of that, samsara is like the pithless plantain tree.
Excellent one, take this to heart.

59
It is much harder to attain a human body from an animal’s 
Even than it is for the hole of a yoke dwelling in one ocean 
To be encountered by a turtle.
Lord of men, by practising the holy dharma, life will be made fruitful.

60
One who, having obtained human birth, commits sins 
Is indeed far more foolish even than
One who clears up vomit
Using a jewel­adorned golden vessel.

61
To live in a favourable place, 
To associate with holy people,
To have good aspiration oneself and previous merits 
Are the four great wheels you possess.

62
Since the Sage has taught that reliance on a spiritual friend 
Completely perfects the brahmacharya,
Rely on holy beings. Through reliance on the conquerors, 
Innumerable ones obtained complete peace.

63
A holder of wrong views, an animal, 
A preta, a hell being,
Without the Conqueror’s words, born in remote lands 
As a primitive, or retarded,

64
A long­lived god: any one of these
Is called ‘rebirth’. Having parted from those
Eight disadvantages without opportunity, one has acquired opportunity.
Therefore, make exertion in order to prevent rebirth.

65
Gentle lord, samsara does not fulfil wishes 
And is the source of many sufferings
Such as death, sickness and ageing. Be saddened by it 
And listen to just some of its faults.

66
Fathers become sons, mothers become wives 
Enemies become friends,
And vice versa. Since that is so, 
There are no certainties in samsara.

67
Everyone has drunk more milk
Than the four oceans. Nevertheless, a samsaric person 
Who follows ordinary beings
Will have to consume still more.

68
The heap of each person’s own bones
Is equal to Mount Meru and surpasses it.
If one could count one’s mothers with beads the size of 
Juniper seeds, they would cover more space than the earth.

69
Having been Indra, worthy of veneration by the world,
One will again fall down to the earth by the power of actions. 
Having been a universal emperor,
One will become the servant of a servant in samsara.

70
Having long enjoyed the pleasure of the feel 
Of the waists and breasts of heavenly girls, 
One must return to the utterly unbearable feel
Of the violent cutting and crushing machines in hell.

71
Consider that having long dwelled at the summit of Mount Meru, 
Which is pliant and delightfully receptive to the touch of one’s feet, 
Subsequently, one will be struck by the unbearable suffering
Of traversing burning coals and rotten corpses.

72
Accompanied by heavenly girls in higher realms and joyful, 
One frolics in reaching completely beautiful groves.
Subsequently, feet, hands, ears and nose will be severed 
Having arrived at groves with leaves like blades.

73
In gentle flows with golden lotuses,
Having accompanied heavenly girls with beautiful features, 
Once again, in the Unfordable river of hell,
One will be plunged into the unbearable boiling salt waters.

74
In the realm of the gods, having attained the very great bliss of desire 
Or the bliss free of craving as Brahma himself, again,
The incessant suffering of having become
Fuel for the fire of incessant torment will follow.

75
Having illuminated the whole world
With the light of one’s own body that matched the sun and moon, 
Once again one will arrive in a thick darkness
Where even one’s own outstretched arms cannot be seen.

76
Accordingly, such faults indeed exist. Now there is merit; 
Take up the light of the threefold lamp,
Or you will enter alone into an endless darkness 
Which is untouched by the sun or moon.

77
Sentient beings who commit negative actions 
Will experience suffering continuously in the hells 
Of reviving, black thread, intense heating,
Crushing, screaming, incessant torment and so on.

78
Some are pressed like sesame;
Similarly others are ground into fine powder. 
Some are sawn apart;
Likewise others are split by the sharp blades of piercing axes.

79
Likewise, others have blazing streams 
Of molten metal poured into them. 
Some are completely impaled
On searing metal spears with barbs.

80
Some, overpowered by savage dogs
With iron fangs, thrust their arms towards the sky. 
Others, powerless, are ripped apart by ravens 
With agonizing claws and sharp iron beaks.

81
Some, as they are bitten by many kinds of parasites and insects, 
And by ten thousand flesh flies, wasps and mosquitoes, 
Undergo many unbearable wounds
As they are eaten, and they writhe in lamentation.

82
Some are continually ablaze in a mass
Of burning embers and their mouths are agape. 
Some are thrust head first into
Great vats made of iron and cooked like balls of rice.

83
Between sinners and the limitless sufferings of hell
Is the time of just the inhalation and exhalation of a breath. 
Having heard of these, who is not fearful
In one thousand ways? Someone as tough as a vajra.

84
If seeing depictions, hearing,
Recalling, reading and also fashioned images of the hells 
Produce fear, what can one say of the actual experience 
Of the unbearable full ripening?

85
Just as among all happiness, the exhaustion of craving 
Creates the foremost happiness,
So among all sufferings,
The suffering of the incessant torment hell is the most unbearable.

86
Here, who, in a single day, would suffer
Very violent thrusts by three hundred lances? 
Yet even the lesser sufferings of hell
Cannot be compared to that. They do not approach even a fraction.

87
In that way, although extremely unbearable sufferings 
Will be experienced for a hundred million years,
Still, for as long as the non­virtues have not been exhausted, 
They cannot leave that life.

88
The seeds of these fruitions of non­virtue
Are the negative actions of body, speech and mind. 
How can you be without even an atom of these?
You must energetically persevere in just that.

89
Also, in the realm of animals, there are
Various sufferings such as being killed, tethered and struck.
For those who have abandoned true virtue which brings pacification 
Eating one another is utterly unbearable.

90
Some, in ignorance, will be killed
For the sake of their pearls, wool, bone, flesh or hide. 
Powerless, they are kicked by others, hit, whipped, 
Pierced by iron hooks and bound into service.

91
For pretas, the constant sufferings
Created by their impoverishment are unabated.
Those created by hunger, thirst, cold, heat, weariness and fear 
Make their lives utterly unbearable.

92
Some have mouths as small as the eye of a needle
And stomachs the size of mountains. Tormented by hunger, 
They do not have the ability
To find even a discarded string of filth.

93
Some have bodies of bone and skin and are naked. 
They are like the dried top of a palmyra.
Some have flaming mouths by night, and
As food drops into their mouth of flames, they eat sand.

94
Certain lower types cannot even acquire 
Filth such as pus, excrement or blood, so 
They smash each other’s faces and take
The pus from the matured goitres on their necks.

95
For them, in the summertime,
Even the moon is hot and in winter, even the sun is cold. 
Trees will bear no fruit. By their
Just looking upon them, even rivers will dry up.

96
They will have unimpeded suffering. 
Some creatures who are firmly bound by 
The leash of the karma of evil conduct 
Will not die for fifteen thousand years.

97
That being so, why do the pretas
Receive the one taste of manifold sufferings? 
Its cause is the avarice of people;
Meanness is ignoble as the Buddha has said.

98
In the higher states, although there is great bliss,
The sufferings of death and transmigration are greater. 
Having considered this, superior people
Will not crave for higher states which will be exhausted.

99
The body’s hue becomes repulsive.
One is unhappy on one’s seat. The garlands of flowers wither. 
One’s clothes become stained. On the body,
Perspiration arises when previously it had not.

100
These five portents, signifying the summons to die and transmigrate from higher states,
Arise for the gods who abide in their heavens.
They are similar to those indications signifying death 
When men on earth are summoned to die.

101
For transmigrators from the worlds of the gods 
When there is no longer any remnant of virtue, 
Then, helpless, they will inhabit the animal, preta 
And hell realms, as appropriate.

102
Also, in the asuras, because by nature
They hate the splendour of the gods, they have great suffering of mind. 
Although they have intelligence, by the
Obscurations of their kind, there is no opportunity for seeing the truth.

103
Since samsara is like this, neither gods and men, 
Nor hell beings, pretas and animals,
Are good rebirths. Know that these rebirths 
Will be containers of much harm.

104
Should head or clothes accidentally catch fire, 
Even while proceeding in extinguishing them, 
One should strive towards not taking rebirth. 
There is no necessity more pressing than that.

105
Pure moral conduct, absorption and wisdom 
Transcend sorrow, pacify and discipline—a stainless 
State with no ageing, no death and no exhaustion.
Attainment is devoid of earth, water, wind, sun and moon.

106
Mindfulness, full discrimination of phenomena, perseverance, 
Joy, higher discipline, concentration
And equanimity are the seven branches of enlightenment.
They accumulate virtues which bring the attainment of nirvana.

107
Without wisdom, there is no concentration. 
Yet without concentration, there is no wisdom. 
Those who have both of these
Render the ocean of existence as a hoof­print.

108
Fourteen indeterminates in the world 
Were taught by the Kinsman of the Sun. 
Why are they not to be contemplated? 
They do not pacify the mind.

109
From unawareness come actions, from which
Comes consciousness, from which naming and form completely arise. 
From those come the six sense bases, from which
Contact fully arises, as the Sage has taught.

110
From contact, feelings fully arise.
On the basis of feelings arises craving. 
From craving comes clinging,
From which there is becoming, and from becoming there is birth.

111
When there is birth, there is affliction, sickness, ageing, 
Deprivation, death, fear and so forth.
The extremely great heap of these sufferings will arise. 
The cessation of birth will cease all of these.

112
This arising of dependent origination, the precious and 
Profound treasure of the teachings of the Conqueror, 
Whoever perfectly sees it,
Since he fathoms the reality of Buddha, he sees the supreme knowable.

113
Perfect view, livelihood, effort, 
Mindfulness, concentration, speech, action
And perfect understanding are the eight branches of the path. 
Cultivate these in order to bring about pacification.

114
This birth is suffering; ‘craving’ and its agent 
Are the vast sources of that.
Ceasing these is indeed liberation.
Proceeding to attain that is indeed the eightfold noble path.

115
Since that is indeed so, one must always endeavour 
In order to see the Four Truths of a noble one.
Even householders living in the lap of luxury
Will cross over the river of the disturbing emotions by understanding.

116
Those who directly perceived the dharma 
Certainly did not descend from the heavens. 
They did not emerge from the earth like crops.
They were formerly ordinary people subject to disturbing emotions.

117
Fearless one, you have made many requests. 
These beneficial instructions have real meaning.
You must make tame your mind. The Bhagavan said 
That mind is the root of the dharma.

118
Why are these teachings for you,
When even for monks in retreat, they are difficult to do? 
Yet by relying on qualities of the essence of practising 
Even one of these, one’s life will have meaning.

119
Having rejoiced in all the virtue of all and
Completely dedicated one’s own good conduct of the three kinds 
In order to attain buddhahood itself,
Then, by this heap of virtue,

120
In innumerable births in the worlds of gods and men, 
You will master all yogas
And then care for many stricken beings
By acting with the power of the Noble Avalokitesvara.

121
Having arisen, sickness and ageing, desire and hatred 
Are dispelled. In buddhafields, as a bhagavan,
A protector of the world, like Amitabha, 
One will have limitless life.

122
Wisdom, moral discipline and giving will arise and great, stainless fame
Will spread throughout the god realms, the sky and over the earth. 
Then, men on earth and gods in the heavens,
Only taking pleasure in the joys of the finest girls, will certainly be absolutely pacified.

123
The fears of a multitude of sentient beings tormented by the disturbing emotions, birth
And death will be pacified, and through having become a lord of conquerors,
One will attain a state which is transcendental,
A mere designation, pacification, unafraid, ageless and faultless.

This completes The Letter to a Friend, composed as a gift for a friend, King Gautamiputra, by the noble Acharya Nagarjuna.
